With the ongoing story of the Federation of
Planets and at least a couple of ships named
Enterprise, the Star Trek franchise has inspired
generations of die-hard fans.
There are still a few persistent myths that
the crew just can’t seem to shake, though,
so here are some of the false “facts”
that you’ve been believing about Star Trek.
During the first season of Star Trek: Discovery,
a minor scandal broke out when actor Jason
Isaacs admitted he was told not to ad-lib
a particular swear word - not because of the
profanity, but because it included the word
"god."
Star Trek has long promoted a humanist and
non-religious view of the future, with spirituality
usually left to the aliens, and religious
figures like God and the Devil often used
as tricks by the bad guys.
“Excuse me, I’d just like to ask a question?
What does God need with a starship?”
Trek producer Brannon Braga once said that
creator Gene Roddenberry handed down an edict
to the show’s writing staff, saying that,
“Religion and superstition and mystical
thinking were not to be part of his universe.”
The show is clearly meant to take place in
a future based on atheism and secular humanism,
but in practice, that’s not exactly the
case.
While Picard wasn't walking around with a
giant crucifix around his neck, human religion
has been a bit more present in Star Trek than
is popularly thought.
We see the Enterprise’s chapel on the Original
Series episode "Balance of Terror," and Star
Trek: Generations includes a celebration of
Christmas, so some version of Christianity
certainly seems to have survived to the 23rd
century.
Uhura even directly references Christianity
as being impossible to ridicule in “Bread
and Circuses,” when the crew encounters
a technologically advanced Roman Empire who
have “Sun Worshippers” broadcasting on
pirate radio.
“Well, don’t you understand?
It’s not the sun up in the sky.
It’s the Son of God.”
That’s a lot of love for the Lord on the
supposedly atheist show.
A lot of Star Trek fans think The Next Generation
started from scratch, picking up almost 20
years after the end of the original show with
a collection of brand new characters completely
removed from the classic series.
For the most part, that’s true, especially
with regards to the idea of adding a prune-juice
loving Klingon -
“A warrior’s drink.”
- to a crew commanded by a brooding, Shakespeare-quoting
Captain Picard.
"My love is a fever, longing still for that
which longer nurseth the disease."
But before The Next Generation hit the airwaves
in 1987, there was another attempt at reviving
Star Trek, and it included the blueprints
for a few key characters.
In 1977, a TV project called Star Trek: Phase
II almost made it to production.
Sets were built, actors cast, and over a dozen
scripts written.
When producers decided it would work better
as a feature film, however the project was
scrapped, and pieces of it were repurposed.
Alan Dean Foster’s pilot script was retooled
into Star Trek: The Motion Picture.
Two of Phase II’s characters, the debonair
Commander Decker, and his former love, the
exotic alien Ilia, made their way into the
film.
But a third new character, the emotionless
Vulcan Xon, didn't make the same jump to the
big screen.
When all three of those characters were jettisoned
from future movies, the Trek team decided
to tweak them again for the small screen.
Xon was transformed from a Vulcan learning
to be more human into Data, an android with
the same dream, and Decker and Ilia were reimagined
as Commander Riker and Counselor Troi, with
the same basic backstory and personalities.
Even a few of those Phase II scripts were
pulled out of the mothballs during the 1988
writers’ strike for some second-season episodes
of Next Generation, including the one where
Troi was impregnated by a ball of light.
Maybe it’s a good thing that we never got
to see more of Phase II.
Star Trek has always tried its hardest to
promote equality, and considering that Martin
Luther King Jr. was a fan, they were clearly
doing something right.
When it came to equality, the show always
had good intentions, but implementing them
was another matter, and the show's lofty ideals
ran into the reality of real-world bigotry
right from the beginning.
The show’s original pilot, which saw a woman
serving as the Enterprise's first officer,
also saw the captain complaining about his
female crewmates.
“It’s just that I can’t get used to
having a woman on the bridge.”
Then there's the infamous Next Generation
episode "Code of Honor,” which is often
regarded as one of the worst Star Trek episodes
of all time.
It managed to be both racist and sexist at
the same time, telling the story of an aliens
who, as Screenprism put it,
"...speak in thick African accents, dress
in stereotypical tribal garb, and are ruled
by appetites like ancient barbarians.”
And they also kidnap the blonde, caucasian
Lieutenant Tasha Yar.
In fact, the director of the episode was fired
halfway through filming for his uncomfortably
racist choices.
And that’s not the only episode of TNG explicitly
based on racial stereotypes, either.
And then there's the long, drawn-out debate
about including LGBTQ characters in the Trek
universe.
Trek writer Ronald D. Moore has been candid
about the franchise's handling of the topic,
saying, quote, "we've just failed at it."
Thankfully, Discovery has finally included
a gay couple as key members of the ship's
crew, helping to fix an oversight that's long
vexed the franchise.
Gene Roddenberry, the visionary behind all
things Star Trek, had a very specific edict
for the characters on his shows.
He was creating a utopian future in which
humans have achieved peace and conflict will
be a thing of the past.
An admirable goal for humanity, sure, but
for a room of TV writers it was a living nightmare.
How do you write drama without conflict?
Well, it turns out you can't.
While the conflict-free decree did allow for
the more allegorical storytelling style that
the franchise has always been famous for,
the writers still managed to sneak in a fight
here and there.
Why else do you think the crew got possessed
by alien gods and mating hormones so often?
As long as the personal beefs were the result
of some outside force causing trouble with
the crew, Roddenberry would look the other
way.
When he passed away in 1991, the writers behind
the many Star Trek series began to loosen
the reins.
Deep Space Nine was filled with internal conflict
and an all-out war, and incorporating a group
of former terrorists gave the main ensemble
of Voyager the flexibility to create conflict
on a weekly basis.
By the time Discovery rolled around, the crew
members were at each other's throats.
From a deceitful captain to a key character
leading a mutiny, the famous no-conflict rule
became a relic of the past, if it was ever
truly followed to begin with.
Everyone knows that on The Original Series,
if you wore a red shirt, you were going to
die.
The crew was always beaming down to some god-forsaken
planet where an unforeseen danger would make
itself known by killing off a hapless, no-name
crimson-cloaked officer.
They were the cannon fodder of the Star Trek
universe, just anonymous enough to make us
feel bad without their deaths at the hands
of alien blobs really mattering.
But would it surprise you to learn that these
cardinal-hued crewmen weren't actually the
most likely to die?
While it's true that redshirts did represent
a whopping 73% of the total deaths over the
series' 79 episodes, something surprising
pops out once you start running the numbers.
There were 430 crewmen aboard the Enterprise,
239 of them dressed in red.
According to research done by Significance
Magazine, even though redshirts die pretty
often in the show, when you look at the total
population, the fact that they make up over
half the crew means they’re statistically
much less likely to die than their crewmates
in gold.
Their finding?
"Only 10% of the entire Redshirt population
was lost during the three-year run of Star
Trek.
This is less than the 13.4% of Goldshirts."
So, if you're looking to make it through that
five-year mission unscathed, suiting up in
a red isn’t exactly a bad bet by the numbers
- especially if you make yourself busy when
they’re handing out assignments for the
Away Teams.
You might want to make it blue just to be
sure though.
Speaking of the uniform colors, any fan of
The Original Series knows that Spock wore
blue, Scotty wore red, and Kirk wore gold.
Those colors are as indelibly linked to their
characters as Spock's Vulcan salute and Shatner's
over-the-top acting.
“KHAN!”
So sit down because this may come as a bit
of a shock.
Kirk's uniform was, in fact, actually more
of a lime green.
It only turned into command gold thanks to
the quirks of film stock development.
If you don't believe us, take a look at the
rest of Kirk's wardrobe, like his wrap-around
tunic from the "Trouble With Tribbles" episode,
or his dress uniform in the Season 1 episode
"Court Martial.”
All green!
Apparently, many of the colors chosen for
the show were intended to promote RCA's new
color television units, including the green
uniforms.
That explains the bright, striking style of
the series, even if some of the colors failed
to turn out exactly as expected.
For decades, fans and even some of the people
behind Trek itself have steadfastly believed
that Pavel Chekov, the spunky ensign with
the indecipherable accent, was created as
an olive branch to the Soviet Union.
“Excuse me sir, can you direct me to the
naval base in Alameda?
It’s where they keep the nuclear wessels.”
As the legend goes, in the fall of 1966 Gene
Roddenberry got the idea to introduce a new,
hunky heartthrob to the cast with hair like
a British Invasion rock star, and Walter Koenig
apparently fit the bill.
But at some point, word got to Roddenberry
that Pravda, the official newspaper of Soviet
Russia, had criticized the show for not including
a Russian character in its vision of the future,
and Gene jumped at the idea.
Chekov was born, and Roddenberry even wrote
a letter to the minister of cultural affairs
in Moscow, apologizing for not including him
sooner.
Alas, they never heard back, presumably because
there's no record of Pravda ever writing such
an article.
In fact, Star Trek wasn't even available in
Russia at the time, so whoever received this
letter from an American television producer
proudly hailing the addition of a hunky young
Russian heartthrob to his space show must
have been confused beyond belief.
If there is one cultural catchphrase Star
Trek is best known for, it's Captain Kirk
asking everyone’s favorite engineer to transport
him away from whatever salty vampire or lizard
monster the crew was tangling with that week
with a quick “Beam me up, Scotty!”
But despite the decades-long prominence of
this phrase in pop-culture and on t-shirts
and buttons, Kirk never actually said it…
and neither did anyone else.
Captain Kirk did, of course, say very similar
things a number of times throughout the series,
and in Star Trek IV: The Voyage Home, he gets
pretty close with this:
"Scotty, beam me up."
However, the exact phrase "Beam me up, Scotty"
has never appeared in any Star Trek series
or movie, though it does appear in some of
the unofficial Star Trek novels and other
media.
As a result, it belongs in the same category
as Casablanca’s “play it again, Sam,”
and “Elementary, my dear Watson" from Data’s
favorite detective Sherlock Holmes as quotes
that have been mistakenly attributed to their
source material so often that most people
think they were there all along.
Yes, this is one big pedantic point, but this
is Star Trek we’re talking about.
If you don’t want to obsess over the most
minor details, then it’s probably not the
fandom for you.
Check out one of our newest videos right here!
Plus, even more Grunge videos about your favorite
obsessions are coming soon.
Subscribe to our YouTube channel and hit the
bell so you don't miss a single one.